Embeddings: Helping AI understand data
- There's an obvious question in need of an answer here. Let's say I build an AI app, give it a cookbook as a grounded source for RAG, and ask it for a carrot cake recipe. Carrots are very common ingredients, which will be featured in a lot of different recipes. So how does the AI system and the grounded source know to only give me carrot cake recipes, and even what the difference between a carrot cake and a carrot soup is? How does the LLM know the meaning of my request? And how does the ground truth retrieval system know how to find it? This is a really interesting topic warranting several dedicated courses, so I'll only barely scratch the surface here. First off, if we use an LLM with a sufficiently large context window, meaning how much data we can stuff into the current context, we could lean on the LLM's auto-complete feature to figure this out and would do so with an acceptable level of accuracy. Give it the entire book, ask a question about it, and it would retrieve information out of the book and give it to you. But that's neither practical nor scalable. Instead, we need some way of getting the LLM and the grounded truth retrieval system to retrieve only relevant information and ignore the rest. One way to do this is by turning the original data and the request into embeddings, and then compare them to find the matching pairs. Say what now? Let me explain. Using what's called an embeddings model, we can take any string of text and turn it into a series of numerical representations of points and vectors that connect in a multidimensional space. This is a bit hard to make sense of when I just say it, so here's a simplified example of the core concept. First, we take each recipe from a recipe book and place it in its own field in a database. Next, we find a two-dimensional embeddings model where each dimension represents some parameter. Then we give each recipe to the embeddings model and it places the words in the two-dimensional space. This produces a different map of points for each recipe with the key words featured. The embeddings model puts more similar words, like carrot and squash, closer together and dissimilar words, like squash and kohlrabi, further apart. Finally, lines called vectors are drawn between these points to represent the connections between the words in the text. This mathematical representation of the points and vectors now becomes the embeddings for each individual recipe. And we add these back into the database, so we have both the original text and its embeddings in one row. Now we can prompt an AI system with a query like, "How do I make a vegetable cake?" And the AI system will create embeddings from this question using the same embeddings model, and we get a new vector representing the query, in this case, the line between vegetable and cake. We can then use basic math to compare the query embedding against each of the recipe embeddings and we quickly see that some of the recipes are a close match while others are not. Finally, the AI system returns the original recipe text from the closest matched embeddings as context, and we are back in the RAG flow.