RAFT: RAG with fine-tuning
- Based on what I've said about RAG and fine tuning so far, you may already intuit that there is a connection here. And that connection has been proven through experimentation and research, so much so that it now has a name, RAFT, Retrieval Augmented Fine-Tuning. RAFT is an answer to the challenge of creating efficient LLM based AI systems that are grounded in specialized domain data like internal enterprise documents. The idea is to first use RAG to fine-tune the LLM on the domain=specific data, so it recognizes and matches the patterns in the data, and then use the resulting raft model in conjunction with RAG to produce better answers that are not only grounded in the domain data, but also conforms to its patterns. The RAFT process leverages the reasoning capabilities of LLM foundation models to create the training data for fine-tuning. It goes something like this, first, create or generate a set of domain-specific questions matching the types of user queries the system will handle. Next, use RAG to retrieve two types of domain documents, oracle docs containing the answer to the question and distractor docs containing irrelevant information. From here, combine the original question with the associated Oracle docs to create a chain of thought answer that breaks down not only the answer, but a detailed reasoning process. And finally, run the fine-tuning process using three types of training examples, question, oracle data, and correct chain of thought answers. Question, distractor data, and correct chain of thought answers. And question, a mix of data, and correct chain of thought answers. When a mix of these three training examples are used in the fine-tuning process, the model imprints a pattern to use relevant oracle data, ignore irrelevant distractor data, and discern what data is relevant for any question. This new RAFT model combined with traditional RAG produces a robust, fine-tuned LLM based AI system, firmly grounded in specialized domain knowledge and highly likely to generate relevant and accurate responses.